A Markov chain or Markov process is a stochastic model describing a sequence of possible events in which the probability of each event depends only on the state attained in the previous event.
Informally, this may be thought of as, What happens next depends only on the state of affairs now. 
A countably infinite sequence, in which the chain moves state at discrete time steps, gives a discrete time Markov chain. A continuous-time process is called a continuous-time Markov chain. 
It is named after the Russian mathematician Andrey Markov.
Markov chains have many applications as statistical models of real world processes, such as studying cruise control systems in motor vehicles, queues or lines of customers arriving at an airport, currency exchange rates and animal population dynamics.
Markov processes are the basis for general stochastic simulation methods known as Markov chain Monte Carlo, which are used for simulating sampling from complex probability distributions, and have found application in Bayesian statistics, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, physics, chemistry, economics, finance, signal processing, information theory and speech processing.
The adjectives Markovian and Markov are used to describe something that is related to a Markov process.
A Markov process is a stochastic process that satisfies the Markov property which is sometimes characterized as "memorylessness". 
In simpler terms, it is a process for which predictions can be made regarding future outcomes based solely on its present state and most importantly such predictions are just as good as the ones that could be made knowing the process's full history.
In other words, conditional on the present state of the system, its future and past states are independent.
A Markov chain is a type of Markov process that has either a discrete state space or a discrete index set often representing time, but the precise definition of a Markov chain varies.
For example, it is common to define a Markov chain as a Markov process in either discrete or continuous time with a countable state space, thus regardless of the nature of time, but it is also common to define a Markov chain as having discrete time in either countable or continuous state space, thus regardless of the state space.