the earth was without form , and void ; and darkness was upon the face of the deep . and the spirit of god moved upon the face of the waters .
god saw the light , that it was good : and god divided the light from the darkness .
god said , let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters , and let it divide the waters from the waters .
god called the firmament heaven . and the evening and the morning were the second day .
god called the dry land earth ; and the gathering together of the waters called he seas : and god saw that it was good .
the earth brought forth grass , and herb yielding seed after his kind , and the tree yielding fruit , whose seed was in itself , after his kind : and god saw that it was good . 
god said , let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night ; and let them be for signs , and for seasons , and for days , and years : 
god made two great lights ; the greater light to rule the day , and the lesser light to rule the night : he made the stars also .
to rule over the day and over the night , and to divide the light from the darkness : and god saw that it was good .
god said , let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life , and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven .
god blessed them , saying , be fruitful , and multiply , and fill the waters in the seas , and let fowl multiply in the earth .
god said , let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind , cattle , and creeping thing , and beast of the earth after his kind : and it was so .
god said , let us make man in our image , after our likeness : and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea , and over the fowl of the air , and over the cattle , and over all the earth , and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth .
god blessed them , and god said unto them , be fruitful , and multiply , and replenish the earth , and subdue it : and have dominion over the fish of the sea , and over the fowl of the air , and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth .
to every beast of the earth , and to every fowl of the air , and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth , wherein there is life , i have given every green herb for meat : and it was so .
thus the heavens and the earth were finished , and all the host of them .
god blessed the seventh day , and sanctified it : because that in it he had rested from all his work which god created and made .
every plant of the field before it was in the earth , and every herb of the field before it grew : for the lord god had not caused it to rain upon the earth , and there was not a man to till the ground .
the lord god formed man of the dust of the ground , and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ; and man became a living soul .
out of the ground made the lord god to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight , and good for food ; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden , and the tree of knowledge of good and evil . 
the name of the first is pison : that is it which compasseth the whole land of havilah , where there is gold ;
the name of the second river is gihon : the same is it that compasseth the whole land of ethiopia .
the lord god took the man , and put him into the garden of eden to dress it and to keep it .
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , thou shalt not eat of it : for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die .
out of the ground the lord god formed every beast of the field , and every fowl of the air ; and brought them unto adam to see what he would call them : and whatsoever adam called every living creature , that was the name thereof .
the lord god caused a deep sleep to fall upon adam and he slept : and he took one of his ribs , and closed up the flesh instead thereof ;
adam said , this is now bone of my bones , and flesh of my flesh : she shall be called woman , because she was taken out of man .
they were both naked , the man and his wife , and were not ashamed .
the woman said unto the serpent , we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden :
the serpent said unto the woman , ye shall not surely die :
when the woman saw that the tree was good for food , and that it was pleasant to the eyes , and a tree to be desired to make one wise , she took of the fruit thereof , and did eat , and gave also unto her husband with her ; and he did eat . 
they heard the voice of the lord god walking in the garden in the cool of the day : and adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the lord god amongst the trees of the garden .
he said , i heard thy voice in the garden , and i was afraid , because i was naked ; and i hid myself .
the man said , the woman whom thou gavest to be with me , she gave me of the tree , and i did eat .
the lord god said unto the serpent , because thou hast done this , thou art cursed above all cattle , and above every beast of the field ; upon thy belly shalt thou go , and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life :
unto the woman he said , i will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception ; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children ; and thy desire shall be to thy husband , and he shall rule over thee .
thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee ; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field ;
adam called his wife's name eve ; because she was the mother of all living .
the lord god said , behold , the man is become as one of us , to know good and evil : and now , lest he put forth his hand , and take also of the tree of life , and eat , and live for ever :
so he drove out the man ; and he placed at the east of the garden of eden cherubims , and a flaming sword which turned every way , to keep the way of the tree of life .
she again bare his brother abel . and abel was a keeper of sheep , but cain was a tiller of the ground .
abel , he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof . and the lord had respect unto abel and to his offering : 
the lord said unto cain , why art thou wroth ? and why is thy countenance fallen ?
cain talked with abel his brother : and it came to pass , when they were in the field , that cain rose up against abel his brother , and slew him .
he said , what hast thou done ? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground .
when thou tillest the ground , it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength ; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth .
behold , thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth ; and from thy face shall i be hid ; and i shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth ; and it shall come to pass , that every one that findeth me shall slay me .
cain went out from the presence of the lord , and dwelt in the land of nod , on the east of eden .
unto enoch was born irad : and irad begat mehujael : and mehujael begat methusael : and methusael begat lamech .
adah bare jabal : he was the father of such as dwell in tents , and of such as have cattle .
zillah , she also bare tubal-cain , an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron : and the sister of tubal-cain was naamah .
if cain shall be avenged sevenfold , truly lamech seventy and sevenfold . 
to seth , to him also there was born a son ; and he called his name enos : then began men to call upon the name of the lord . 
male and female created he them ; and blessed them , and called their name adam , in the day when they were created .
the days of adam after he had begotten seth were eight hundred years : and he begat sons and daughters :
seth lived an hundred and five years , and begat enos :
all the days of seth were nine hundred and twelve years : and he died .
enos lived after he begat cainan eight hundred and fifteen years , and begat sons and daughters :
cainan lived seventy years , and begat mahalaleel :
all the days of cainan were nine hundred and ten years : and he died .
mahalaleel lived after he begat jared eight hundred and thirty years , and begat sons and daughters :
jared lived an hundred sixty and two years , and he begat enoch :
all the days of jared were nine hundred sixty and two years : and he died . 
enoch walked with god after he begat methuselah three hundred years , and begat sons and daughters : 
enoch walked with god : and he was not ; for god took him .
methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty and two years , and begat sons and daughters :
lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years , and begat a son :
lamech lived after he begat noah five hundred ninety and five years , and begat sons and daughters :
noah was five hundred years old : and noah begat shem , ham , and japheth .
that the sons of god saw the daughters of men that they were fair ; and they took them wives of all which they chose .
there were giants in the earth in those days ; and also after that , when the sons of god came in unto the daughters of men , and they bare children to them , the same became mighty men which were of old , men of renown .
it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth , and it grieved him at his heart .
but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord .
noah begat three sons , shem , ham , and japheth . 
god looked upon the earth , and , behold , it was corrupt ; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth . 
make thee an ark of gopher wood ; rooms shalt thou make in the ark , and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch .
a window shalt thou make to the ark , and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above ; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof ; with lower , second , and third stories shalt thou make it .
but with thee will i establish my covenant ; and thou shalt come into the ark , thou , and thy sons , and thy wife , and thy sons' wives with thee .
of fowls after their kind , and of cattle after their kind , of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind , two of every sort shall come unto thee , to keep them alive .
thus did noah ; according to all that god commanded him , so did he .
of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens , the male and his female : and of beasts that are not clean by two , the male and his female .
for yet seven days , and i will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights ; and every living substance that i have made will i destroy from off the face of the earth .
noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth .
of clean beasts , and of beasts that are not clean , and of fowls , and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth ,
it came to pass after seven days , that the waters of the flood were upon the earth . 
the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights . 
they , and every beast after his kind , and all the cattle after their kind , and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind , and every fowl after his kind , every bird of every sort .
they that went in , went in male and female of all flesh , as god had commanded him : and the lord shut him in .
the waters prevailed , and were increased greatly upon the earth ; and the ark went upon the face of the waters .
fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail ; and the mountains were covered .
all in whose nostrils was the breath of life , of all that was in the dry land , died .
the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days .
the fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped , and the rain from heaven was restrained ;
the ark rested in the seventh month , on the seventeenth day of the month , upon the mountains of ararat .
it came to pass at the end of forty days , that noah opened the window of the ark which he had made :
also he sent forth a dove from him , to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground ; 
he stayed yet other seven days ; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark ; 
he stayed yet other seven days ; and sent forth the dove ; which returned not again unto him any more .
in the second month , on the seven and twentieth day of the month , was the earth dried .
go forth of the ark , thou , and thy wife , and thy sons , and thy sons' wives with thee .
noah went forth , and his sons , and his wife , and his sons' wives with him :
noah builded an altar unto the lord ; and took of every clean beast , and of every clean fowl , and offered burnt offerings on the altar .
while the earth remaineth , seedtime and harvest , and cold and heat , and summer and winter , and day and night shall not cease .
the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth , and upon every fowl of the air , upon all that moveth upon the earth , and upon all the fishes of the sea ; into your hand are they delivered .
but flesh with the life thereof , which is the blood thereof , shall ye not eat .
whoso sheddeth man's blood , by man shall his blood be shed : for in the image of god made he man . 
god spake unto noah , and to his sons with him , saying , 
with every living creature that is with you , of the fowl , of the cattle , and of every beast of the earth with you ; from all that go out of the ark , to every beast of the earth .
god said , this is the token of the covenant which i make between me and you and every living creature that is with you , for perpetual generations :
it shall come to pass , when i bring a cloud over the earth , that the bow shall be seen in the cloud :
the bow shall be in the cloud ; and i will look upon it , that i may remember the everlasting covenant between god and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth .
the sons of noah , that went forth of the ark , were shem , and ham , and japheth : and ham is the father of canaan .
noah began to be an husbandman , and he planted a vineyard :
ham , the father of canaan , saw the nakedness of his father , and told his two brethren without .
noah awoke from his wine , and knew what his younger son had done unto him .
he said , blessed be the lord god of shem ; and canaan shall be his servant .
noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years .
now these are the generations of the sons of noah , shem , ham , and japheth : and unto them were sons born after the flood . 
the sons of gomer ; ashkenaz , and riphath , and togarmah .
by these were the isles of the gentiles divided in their lands ; every one after his tongue , after their families , in their nations .
the sons of cush ; seba , and havilah , and sabtah , and raamah , and sabtecha : and the sons of raamah ; sheba , and dedan .
he was a mighty hunter before the lord : wherefore it is said , even as nimrod the mighty hunter before the lord .
out of that land went forth asshur , and builded nineveh , and the city rehoboth , and calah ,
mizraim begat ludim , and anamim , and lehabim , and naphtuhim ,
canaan begat sidon his firstborn , and heth ,
the hivite , and the arkite , and the sinite ,
the border of the canaanites was from sidon , as thou comest to gerar , unto gaza ; as thou goest , unto sodom , and gomorrah , and admah , and zeboim , even unto lasha .
unto shem also , the father of all the children of eber , the brother of japheth the elder , even to him were children born .
the children of aram ; uz , and hul , and gether , and mash .
unto eber were born two sons : the name of one was peleg ; for in his days was the earth divided ; and his brother's name was joktan . 
hadoram , and uzal , and diklah ,
ophir , and havilah , and jobab : all these were the sons of joktan .
these are the sons of shem , after their families , after their tongues , in their lands , after their nations .
the whole earth was of one language , and of one speech .
they said one to another , go to , let us make brick , and burn them throughly . and they had brick for stone , and slime had they for morter .
the lord came down to see the city and the tower , which the children of men builded .
go to , let us go down , and there confound their language , that they may not understand one another's speech .
therefore is the name of it called babel ; because the lord did there confound the language of all the earth : and from thence did the lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth .
shem lived after he begat arphaxad five hundred years , and begat sons and daughters .
arphaxad lived after he begat salah four hundred and three years , and begat sons and daughters .
salah lived after he begat eber four hundred and three years , and begat sons and daughters . 
eber lived after he begat peleg four hundred and thirty years , and begat sons and daughters .
peleg lived after he begat reu two hundred and nine years , and begat sons and daughters .
reu lived after he begat serug two hundred and seven years , and begat sons and daughters .
serug lived after he begat nahor two hundred years , and begat sons and daughters .
nahor lived after he begat terah an hundred and nineteen years , and begat sons and daughters .
now these are the generations of terah : terah begat abram , nahor , and haran ; and haran begat lot .
abram and nahor took them wives : the name of abram's wife was sarai ; and the name of nahor's wife , milcah , the daughter of haran , the father of milcah , and the father of iscah .
terah took abram his son , and lot the son of haran his son's son , and sarai his daughter in law , his son abram's wife ; and they went forth with them from ur of the chaldees , to go into the land of canaan ; and they came unto haran , and dwelt there .
now the lord had said unto abram , get thee out of thy country , and from thy kindred , and from thy father's house , unto a land that i will shew thee :
i will bless them that bless thee , and curse him that curseth thee : and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed .
abram took sarai his wife , and lot his brother's son , and all their substance that they had gathered , and the souls that they had gotten in haran ; and they went forth to go into the land of canaan ; and into the land of canaan they came . 
the lord appeared unto abram , and said , unto thy seed will i give this land : and there builded he an altar unto the lord , who appeared unto him .
abram journeyed , going on still toward the south .
it came to pass , when he was come near to enter into egypt , that he said unto sarai his wife , behold now , i know that thou art a fair woman to look upon :
say , i pray thee , thou art my sister : that it may be well with me for thy sake ; and my soul shall live because of thee .
the princes also of pharaoh saw her , and commended her before pharaoh : and the woman was taken into pharaoh's house . 
the lord plagued pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of sarai abram's wife . 
why saidst thou , she is my sister ? so i might have taken her to me to wife : now therefore behold thy wife , take her , and go thy way .
abram went up out of egypt , he , and his wife , and all that he had , and lot with him , into the south .
he went on his journeys from the south even to bethel , unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning , between bethel and hai ;
lot also , which went with abram , had flocks , and herds , and tents .
there was a strife between the herdmen of abram's cattle and the herdmen of lot's cattle : and the canaanite and the perizzite dwelled then in the land .
is not the whole land before thee ? separate thyself , i pray thee , from me : if thou wilt take the left hand , then i will go to the right ; or if thou depart to the right hand , then i will go to the left .
then lot chose him all the plain of jordan ; and lot journeyed east : and they separated themselves the one from the other .
but the men of sodom were wicked and sinners before the lord exceedingly .
for all the land which thou seest , to thee will i give it , and to thy seed for ever .
arise , walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it ; for i will give it unto thee . 
it came to pass in the days of amraphel king of shinar , arioch king of ellasar , chedorlaomer king of elam , and tidal king of nations ; 
all these were joined together in the vale of siddim , which is the salt sea .
in the fourteenth year came chedorlaomer , and the kings that were with him , and smote the rephaims in ashteroth karnaim , and the zuzims in ham , and the emims in shaveh kiriathaim ,
they returned , and came to en-mishpat , which is kadesh , and smote all the country of the amalekites , and also the amorites that dwelt in hazezon-tamar .
with chedorlaomer the king of elam , and with tidal king of nations , and amraphel king of shinar , and arioch king of ellasar ; four kings with five .
they took all the goods of sodom and gomorrah , and all their victuals , and went their way .
there came one that had escaped , and told abram the hebrew ; for he dwelt in the plain of mamre the amorite , brother of eschol , and brother of aner : and these were confederate with abram .
he divided himself against them , he and his servants , by night , and smote them , and pursued them unto hobah , which is on the left hand of damascus .
the king of sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of chedorlaomer , and of the kings that were with him , at the valley of shaveh , which is the king's dale .
he blessed him , and said , blessed be abram of the most high god , possessor of heaven and earth :
the king of sodom said unto abram , give me the persons , and take the goods to thyself . 
that i will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet , and that i will not take any thing that is thine , lest thou shouldest say , i have made abram rich : 
after these things the word of the lord came unto abram in a vision , saying , fear not , abram : i am thy shield , and thy exceeding great reward .
abram said , behold , to me thou hast given no seed : and , lo , one born in my house is mine heir .
he brought him forth abroad , and said , look now toward heaven , and tell the stars , if thou be able to number them : and he said unto him , so shall thy seed be .
he said unto him , i am the lord that brought thee out of ur of the chaldees , to give thee this land to inherit it .
he said unto him , take me an heifer of three years old , and a she goat of three years old , and a ram of three years old , and a turtledove , and a young pigeon .
when the fowls came down upon the carcases , abram drove them away .
he said unto abram , know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs , and shall serve them ; and they shall afflict them four hundred years ;
thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace ; thou shalt be buried in a good old age .
it came to pass , that , when the sun went down , and it was dark , behold a smoking furnace , and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces .
the kenites , and the kenizzites , and the kadmonites , 
the amorites , and the canaanites , and the girgashites , and the jebusites . 
sarai said unto abram , behold now , the lord hath restrained me from bearing : i pray thee , go in unto my maid ; it may be that i may obtain children by her . and abram hearkened to the voice of sarai .
he went in unto hagar , and she conceived : and when she saw that she had conceived , her mistress was despised in her eyes .
but abram said unto sarai , behold , thy maid is in thy hand ; do to her as it pleaseth thee . and when sarai dealt hardly with her , she fled from her face .
he said , hagar , sarai's maid , whence camest thou ? and whither wilt thou go ? and she said , i flee from the face of my mistress sarai .
the angel of the lord said unto her , i will multiply thy seed exceedingly , that it shall not be numbered for multitude .
he will be a wild man ; his hand will be against every man , and every man's hand against him ; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren .
wherefore the well was called beer-lahai-roi ; behold , it is between kadesh and bered .
abram was fourscore and six years old , when hagar bare ishmael to abram . 
i will make my covenant between me and thee , and will multiply thee exceedingly . 
as for me , behold , my covenant is with thee , and thou shalt be a father of many nations .
i will make thee exceeding fruitful , and i will make nations of thee , and kings shall come out of thee .
i will give unto thee , and to thy seed after thee , the land wherein thou art a stranger , all the land of canaan , for an everlasting possession ; and i will be their god .
this is my covenant , which ye shall keep , between me and you and thy seed after thee ; every man child among you shall be circumcised .
he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you , every man child in your generations , he that is born in the house , or bought with money of any stranger , which is not of thy seed .
the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised , that soul shall be cut off from his people ; he hath broken my covenant .
i will bless her , and give thee a son also of her : yea , i will bless her , and she shall be a mother of nations ; kings of people shall be of her .
abraham said unto god , o that ishmael might live before thee !
as for ishmael , i have heard thee : behold , i have blessed him , and will make him fruitful , and will multiply him exceedingly ; twelve princes shall he beget , and i will make him a great nation .
he left off talking with him , and god went up from abraham . 
abraham was ninety years old and nine , when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin . 
in the selfsame day was abraham circumcised , and ishmael his son .
the lord appeared unto him in the plains of mamre : and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day ;
said , my lord , if now i have found favour in thy sight , pass not away , i pray thee , from thy servant :
i will fetch a morsel of bread , and comfort ye your hearts ; after that ye shall pass on : for therefore are ye come to your servant . and they said , so do , as thou hast said .
abraham ran unto the herd , and fetcht a calf tender and good , and gave it unto a young man ; and he hasted to dress it .
they said unto him , where is sarah thy wife ? and he said , behold , in the tent .
now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age ; and it ceased to be with sarah after the manner of women .
the lord said unto abraham , wherefore did sarah laugh , saying , shall i of a surety bear a child , which am old ?
then sarah denied , saying , i laughed not ; for she was afraid . and he said , nay ; but thou didst laugh .
the lord said , shall i hide from abraham that thing which i do ; 
for i know him , that he will command his children and his household after him , and they shall keep the way of the lord , to do justice and judgment ; that the lord may bring upon abraham that which he hath spoken of him . 
i will go down now , and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it , which is come unto me ; and if not , i will know .
abraham drew near , and said , wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked ?
that be far from thee to do after this manner , to slay the righteous with the wicked : and that the righteous should be as the wicked , that be far from thee : shall not the judge of all the earth do right ?
abraham answered and said , behold now , i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord , which am but dust and ashes :
he spake unto him yet again , and said , peradventure there shall be forty found there . and he said , i will not do it for forty's sake .
he said , behold now , i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord : peradventure there shall be twenty found there . and he said , i will not destroy it for twenty's sake .
the lord went his way , as soon as he had left communing with abraham : and abraham returned unto his place .
he said , behold now , my lords , turn in , i pray you , into your servant's house , and tarry all night , and wash your feet , and ye shall rise up early , and go on your ways . and they said , nay ; but we will abide in the street all night .
but before they lay down , the men of the city , even the men of sodom , compassed the house round , both old and young , all the people from every quarter :
lot went out at the door unto them , and shut the door after him , 
behold now , i have two daughters which have not known man ; let me , i pray you , bring them out unto you , and do ye to them as is good in your eyes : only unto these men do nothing ; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof . 
but the men put forth their hand , and pulled lot into the house to them , and shut to the door .
the men said unto lot , hast thou here any besides ? son in law , and thy sons , and thy daughters , and whatsoever thou hast in the city , bring them out of this place :
lot went out , and spake unto his sons in law , which married his daughters , and said , up , get you out of this place ; for the lord will destroy this city . but he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law .
while he lingered , the men laid hold upon his hand , and upon the hand of his wife , and upon the hand of his two daughters ; the lord being merciful unto him : and they brought him forth , and set him without the city .
lot said unto them , oh , not so , my lord : 
behold now , this city is near to flee unto , and it is a little one : oh , let me escape thither , (is it not a little one ?) and my soul shall live . 
haste thee , escape thither ; for i cannot do any thing till thou be come thither . therefore the name of the city was called zoar .
then the lord rained upon sodom and upon gomorrah brimstone and fire from the lord out of heaven ;
but his wife looked back from behind him , and she became a pillar of salt .
he looked toward sodom and gomorrah , and toward all the land of the plain , and beheld , and , lo , the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace .
lot went up out of zoar , and dwelt in the mountain , and his two daughters with him ; for he feared to dwell in zoar : and he dwelt in a cave , he and his two daughters .
come , let us make our father drink wine , and we will lie with him , that we may preserve seed of our father .
it came to pass on the morrow , that the firstborn said unto the younger , behold , i lay yesternight with my father : let us make him drink wine this night also ; and go thou in , and lie with him , that we may preserve seed of our father .
thus were both the daughters of lot with child by their father .
the younger , she also bare a son , and called his name benammi : the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this day .
abraham said of sarah his wife , she is my sister : and abimelech king of gerar sent , and took sarah . 
but abimelech had not come near her : and he said , lord , wilt thou slay also a righteous nation ? 
god said unto him in a dream , yea , i know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart ; for i also withheld thee from sinning against me : therefore suffered i thee not to touch her .
therefore abimelech rose early in the morning , and called all his servants , and told all these things in their ears : and the men were sore afraid .
abimelech said unto abraham , what sawest thou , that thou hast done this thing ?
yet indeed she is my sister ; she is the daughter of my father , but not the daughter of my mother ; and she became my wife .
abimelech took sheep , and oxen , and menservants , and womenservants , and gave them unto abraham , and restored him sarah his wife .
unto sarah he said , behold , i have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver : behold , he is to thee a covering of the eyes , unto all that are with thee , and with all other : thus she was reproved .
for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of abimelech , because of sarah abraham's wife .
for sarah conceived , and bare abraham a son in his old age , at the set time of which god had spoken to him .
abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old , as god had commanded him .
sarah said , god hath made me to laugh , so that all that hear will laugh with me . 
the child grew , and was weaned : and abraham made a great feast the same day that isaac was weaned . 
wherefore she said unto abraham , cast out this bondwoman and her son : for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son , even with isaac .
god said unto abraham , let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad , and because of thy bondwoman ; in all that sarah hath said unto thee , hearken unto her voice ; for in isaac shall thy seed be called .
abraham rose up early in the morning , and took bread , and a bottle of water , and gave it unto hagar , putting it on her shoulder , and the child , and sent her away : and she departed , and wandered in the wilderness of beer-sheba .
she went , and sat her down over against him a good way off , as it were a bowshot : for she said , let me not see the death of the child . and she sat over against him , and lift up her voice , and wept .
arise , lift up the lad , and hold him in thine hand ; for i will make him a great nation .
god was with the lad ; and he grew , and dwelt in the wilderness , and became an archer .
it came to pass at that time , that abimelech and phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto abraham , saying , god is with thee in all that thou doest :
abraham said , i will swear .
abimelech said , i wot not who hath done this thing : neither didst thou tell me , neither yet heard i of it , but to day .
abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves .
he said , for these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand , that they may be a witness unto me , that i have digged this well .
thus they made a covenant at beer-sheba : then abimelech rose up , and phichol the chief captain of his host , and they returned into the land of the philistines . 
abraham sojourned in the philistines' land many days .
he said , take now thy son , thine only son isaac , whom thou lovest , and get thee into the land of moriah ; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of .
then on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes , and saw the place afar off .
abraham took the wood of the burnt offering , and laid it upon isaac his son ; and he took the fire in his hand , and a knife ; and they went both of them together .
abraham said , my son , god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering : so they went both of them together .
abraham stretched forth his hand , and took the knife to slay his son . 
he said , lay not thine hand upon the lad , neither do thou any thing unto him : for now i know that thou fearest god , seeing thou hast not withheld thy son , thine only son from me . 
abraham called the name of that place jehovah-jireh : as it is said to this day , in the mount of the lord it shall be seen .
said , by myself have i sworn , saith the lord , for because thou hast done this thing , and hast not withheld thy son , thine only son :
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed ; because thou hast obeyed my voice .
it came to pass after these things , that it was told abraham , saying , behold , milcah , she hath also born children unto thy brother nahor ;
chesed , and hazo , and pildash , and jidlaph , and bethuel .
his concubine , whose name was reumah , she bare also tebah , and gaham , and thahash , and maachah .
sarah died in kirjath-arba ; the same is hebron in the land of canaan : and abraham came to mourn for sarah , and to weep for her .
i am a stranger and a sojourner with you : give me a possession of a buryingplace with you , that i may bury my dead out of my sight .
hear us , my lord : thou art a mighty prince among us : in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead ; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre , but that thou mayest bury thy dead .
he communed with them , saying , if it be your mind that i should bury my dead out of my sight ; hear me , and intreat for me to ephron the son of zohar , 
ephron dwelt among the children of heth : and ephron the hittite answered abraham in the audience of the children of heth , even of all that went in at the gate of his city , saying , 
abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land .
ephron answered abraham , saying unto him ,
abraham hearkened unto ephron ; and abraham weighed to ephron the silver , which he had named in the audience of the sons of heth , four hundred shekels of silver , current money with the merchant .
unto abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of heth , before all that went in at the gate of his city .
the field , and the cave that is therein , were made sure unto abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of heth .
abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house , that ruled over all that he had , put , i pray thee , thy hand under my thigh :
but thou shalt go unto my country , and to my kindred , and take a wife unto my son isaac .
abraham said unto him , beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again .
if the woman will not be willing to follow thee , then thou shalt be clear from this my oath : only bring not my son thither again .
the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master , and departed ; for all the goods of his master were in his hand : and he arose , and went to mesopotamia , unto the city of nahor . 
he said , o lord god of my master abraham , i pray thee , send me good speed this day , and shew kindness unto my master abraham . 
let it come to pass , that the damsel to whom i shall say , let down thy pitcher , i pray thee , that i may drink ; and she shall say , drink , and i will give thy camels drink also : let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant isaac ; and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master .
the damsel was very fair to look upon , a virgin , neither had any man known her : and she went down to the well , and filled her pitcher , and came up .
she said , drink , my lord : and she hasted , and let down her pitcher upon her hand , and gave him drink .
she hasted , and emptied her pitcher into the trough , and ran again unto the well to draw water , and drew for all his camels .
it came to pass , as the camels had done drinking , that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight , and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold ;
she said unto him , i am the daughter of bethuel the son of milcah , which she bare unto nahor .
the man bowed down his head , and worshipped the lord .
the damsel ran , and told them of her mother's house these things .
it came to pass , when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands , and when he heard the words of rebekah his sister , saying , thus spake the man unto me ; that he came unto the man ; and , behold , he stood by the camels at the well .
the man came into the house : and he ungirded his camels , and gave straw and provender for the camels , and water to wash his feet , and the men's feet that were with him .
he said , i am abraham's servant .
sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old : and unto him hath he given all that he hath . 
but thou shalt go unto my father's house , and to my kindred , and take a wife unto my son .
he said unto me , the lord , before whom i walk , will send his angel with thee , and prosper thy way ; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred , and of my father's house :
i came this day unto the well , and said , o lord god of my master abraham , if now thou do prosper my way which i go ;
she say to me , both drink thou , and i will also draw for thy camels : let the same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my master's son .
she made haste , and let down her pitcher from her shoulder , and said , drink , and i will give thy camels drink also : so i drank , and she made the camels drink also .
i bowed down my head , and worshipped the lord , and blessed the lord god of my master abraham , which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son .
then laban and bethuel answered and said , the thing proceedeth from the lord : we cannot speak unto thee bad or good .
it came to pass , that , when abraham's servant heard their words , he worshipped the lord , bowing himself to the earth . 
they did eat and drink , he and the men that were with him , and tarried all night ; and they rose up in the morning , and he said , send me away unto my master .
he said unto them , hinder me not , seeing the lord hath prospered my way ; send me away that i may go to my master .
they called rebekah , and said unto her , wilt thou go with this man ? and she said , i will go .
they blessed rebekah , and said unto her , thou art our sister , be thou the mother of thousands of millions , and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them .
isaac came from the way of the well lahai-roi ; for he dwelt in the south country .
rebekah lifted up her eyes , and when she saw isaac , she lighted off the camel .
the servant told isaac all things that he had done .
then again abraham took a wife , and her name was keturah .
jokshan begat sheba , and dedan . and the sons of dedan were asshurim , and letushim , and leummim .
abraham gave all that he had unto isaac .
these are the days of the years of abraham's life which he lived , an hundred threescore and fifteen years . 
his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of machpelah , in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite , which is before mamre ;
it came to pass after the death of abraham , that god blessed his son isaac ; and isaac dwelt by the well lahai-roi .
these are the names of the sons of ishmael , by their names , according to their generations : the firstborn of ishmael , nebajoth ; and kedar , and adbeel , and mibsam ,
hadar , and tema , jetur , naphish , and kedemah :
these are the years of the life of ishmael , an hundred and thirty and seven years : and he gave up the ghost and died ; and was gathered unto his people .
these are the generations of isaac , abraham's son : abraham begat isaac :
isaac intreated the lord for his wife , because she was barren : and the lord was intreated of him , and rebekah his wife conceived .
the lord said unto her , two nations are in thy womb , and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels ; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people ; and the elder shall serve the younger .
the first came out red , all over like an hairy garment ; and they called his name esau .
the boys grew : and esau was a cunning hunter , a man of the field ; and jacob was a plain man , dwelling in tents . 
jacob sod pottage : and esau came from the field , and he was faint : 
jacob said , sell me this day thy birthright .
jacob said , swear to me this day ; and he sware unto him : and he sold his birthright unto jacob .
there was a famine in the land , beside the first famine that was in the days of abraham . and isaac went unto abimelech king of the philistines unto gerar .
sojourn in this land , and i will be with thee , and will bless thee ; for unto thee , and unto thy seed , i will give all these countries , and i will perform the oath which i sware unto abraham thy father ;
because that abraham obeyed my voice , and kept my charge , my commandments , my statutes , and my laws .
the men of the place asked him of his wife ; and he said , she is my sister : for he feared to say , she is my wife ; lest , said he , the men of the place should kill me for rebekah ; because she was fair to look upon .
abimelech called isaac , and said , behold , of a surety she is thy wife : and how saidst thou , she is my sister ? and isaac said unto him , because i said , lest i die for her .
abimelech charged all his people , saying , he that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death .
the man waxed great , and went forward , and grew until he became very great :
for all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days of abraham his father , the philistines had stopped them , and filled them with earth . 
isaac departed thence , and pitched his tent in the valley of gerar , and dwelt there . 
isaac's servants digged in the valley , and found there a well of springing water .
they digged another well , and strove for that also : and he called the name of it sitnah .
he went up from thence to beer-sheba .
he builded an altar there , and called upon the name of the lord and pitched his tent there : and there isaac's servants digged a well .
isaac said unto them , wherefore come ye to me , seeing ye hate me , and have sent me away from you ?
that thou wilt do us no hurt , as we have not touched thee , and as we have done unto thee nothing but good , and have sent thee away in peace : thou art now the blessed of the lord .
they rose up betimes in the morning , and sware one to another : and isaac sent them away , and they departed from him in peace .
he called it shebah : therefore the name of the city is beer-sheba unto this day .
which were a grief of mind unto isaac and to rebekah . 
he said , behold now , i am old , i know not the day of my death : 
make me savoury meat , such as i love , and bring it to me , that i may eat ; that my soul may bless thee before i die .
rebekah spake unto jacob her son , saying , behold , i heard thy father speak unto esau thy brother , saying ,
now therefore , my son , obey my voice according to that which i command thee .
thou shalt bring it to thy father , that he may eat , and that he may bless thee before his death .
my father peradventure will feel me , and i shall seem to him as a deceiver ; and i shall bring a curse upon me , and not a blessing .
he went , and fetched , and brought them to his mother : and his mother made savoury meat , such as his father loved .
she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands , and upon the smooth of his neck :
he came unto his father , and said , my father : and he said , here am i ; who art thou , my son ?
isaac said unto his son , how is it that thou hast found it so quickly , my son ? and he said , because the lord thy god brought it to me .
jacob went near unto isaac his father ; and he felt him , and said , the voice is jacob's voice , but the hands are the hands of esau . 
he said , art thou my very son esau ? and he said , i am . 
his father isaac said unto him , come near now , and kiss me , my son .
therefore god give thee of the dew of heaven , and the fatness of the earth , and plenty of corn and wine :
it came to pass , as soon as isaac had made an end of blessing jacob , and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of isaac his father , that esau his brother came in from his hunting .
isaac his father said unto him , who art thou ? and he said , i am thy son , thy firstborn esau .
when esau heard the words of his father , he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry , and said unto his father , bless me , even me also , o my father .
he said , is not he rightly named jacob ? for he hath supplanted me these two times : he took away my birthright ; and , behold , now he hath taken away my blessing . and he said , hast thou not reserved a blessing for me ?
esau said unto his father , hast thou but one blessing , my father ? bless me , even me also , o my father . and esau lifted up his voice , and wept .
by thy sword shalt thou live , and shalt serve thy brother ; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion , that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck .
these words of esau her elder son were told to rebekah : and she sent and called jacob her younger son , and said unto him , behold , thy brother esau , as touching thee , doth comfort himself , purposing to kill thee .
tarry with him a few days , until thy brother's fury turn away ;
rebekah said to isaac , i am weary of my life because of the daughters of heth : if jacob take a wife of the daughters of heth , such as these which are of the daughters of the land , what good shall my life do me ?
arise , go to padan-aram , to the house of bethuel thy mother's father ; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of laban thy mother's brother .
give thee the blessing of abraham , to thee , and to thy seed with thee ; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger , which god gave unto abraham .
when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob , and sent him away to padan-aram , to take him a wife from thence ; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge , saying , thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan ;
esau seeing that the daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father ;
jacob went out from beer-sheba , and went toward haran .
he dreamed , and behold a ladder set up on the earth , and the top of it reached to heaven : and behold the angels of god ascending and descending on it .
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth , and thou shalt spread abroad to the west , and to the east , and to the north , and to the south : and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed .
jacob awaked out of his sleep , and he said , surely the lord is in this place ; and i knew it not .
jacob rose up early in the morning , and took the stone that he had put for his pillows , and set it up for a pillar , and poured oil upon the top of it .
jacob vowed a vow , saying , if god will be with me , and will keep me in this way that i go , and will give me bread to eat , and raiment to put on ,
this stone , which i have set for a pillar , shall be god's house : and of all that thou shalt give me i will surely give the tenth unto thee .
he looked , and behold a well in the field , and , lo , there were three flocks of sheep lying by it ; for out of that well they watered the flocks : and a great stone was upon the well's mouth .
jacob said unto them , my brethren , whence be ye ? and they said , of haran are we .
he said unto them , is he well ? and they said , he is well : and , behold , rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep .
they said , we cannot , until all the flocks be gathered together , and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth ; then we water the sheep .
it came to pass , when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban his mother's brother , and the sheep of laban his mother's brother , that jacob went near , and rolled the stone from the well's mouth , and watered the flock of laban his mother's brother .
jacob told rachel that he was her father's brother , and that he was rebekah's son : and she ran and told her father .
laban said to him , surely thou art my bone and my flesh . and he abode with him the space of a month . 
laban had two daughters : the name of the elder was leah , and the name of the younger was rachel .
jacob loved rachel ; and said , i will serve thee seven years for rachel thy younger daughter .
jacob served seven years for rachel ; and they seemed unto him but a few days , for the love he had to her .
laban gathered together all the men of the place , and made a feast .
laban gave unto his daughter leah zilpah his maid for an handmaid .
laban said , it must not be so done in our country , to give the younger before the firstborn .
jacob did so , and fulfilled her week : and he gave him rachel his daughter to wife also .
he went in also unto rachel , and he loved also rachel more than leah , and served with him yet seven other years .
leah conceived , and bare a son , and she called his name reuben : for she said , surely the lord hath looked upon my affliction ; now therefore my husband will love me .
she conceived again , and bare a son ; and said , now this time will my husband be joined unto me , because i have born him three sons : therefore was his name called levi . 
when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children , rachel envied her sister ; and said unto jacob , give me children , or else i die . 
she said , behold my maid bilhah , go in unto her ; and she shall bear upon my knees that i may also have children by her .
bilhah conceived , and bare jacob a son .
bilhah rachel's maid conceived again , and bare jacob a second son .
when leah saw that she had left bearing , she took zilpah her maid , and gave her jacob to wife .
leah said , a troop cometh : and she called his name gad .
leah said , happy am i , for the daughters will call me blessed : and she called his name asher .
she said unto her , is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband ? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also ? and rachel said , therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's mandrakes .
god hearkened unto leah , and she conceived , and bare jacob the fifth son .
leah conceived again , and bare jacob the sixth son .
afterwards she bare a daughter , and called her name dinah . 
she conceived , and bare a son ; and said , god hath taken away my reproach : 
it came to pass , when rachel had born joseph , that jacob said unto laban , send me away , that i may go unto mine own place , and to my country .
laban said unto him , i pray thee , if i have found favour in thine eyes , tarry : for i have learned by experience that the lord hath blessed me for thy sake .
he said unto him , thou knowest how i have served thee , and how thy cattle was with me .
he said , what shall i give thee ? and jacob said , thou shalt not give me any thing : if thou wilt do this thing for me , i will again feed and keep thy flock :
so shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come , when it shall come for my hire before thy face : every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats , and brown among the sheep , that shall be counted stolen with me .
he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted , and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted , and every one that had some white in it , and all the brown among the sheep , and gave them into the hand of his sons .
jacob took him rods of green poplar , and of the hazel and chesnut tree ; and pilled white strakes in them , and made the white appear which was in the rods .
the flocks conceived before the rods , and brought forth cattle ringstraked , speckled , and spotted .
it came to pass , whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive , that jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters , that they might conceive among the rods .
the man increased exceedingly , and had much cattle , and maidservants , and menservants , and camels , and asses .
jacob beheld the countenance of laban , and , behold , it was not toward him as before . 
jacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field unto his flock ,
ye know that with all my power i have served your father .
if he said thus , the speckled shall be thy wages ; then all the cattle bare speckled : and if he said thus , the ringstraked shall be thy hire ; then bare all the cattle ringstraked .
it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived , that i lifted up mine eyes , and saw in a dream , and , behold , the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked , speckled , and grisled .
he said , lift up now thine eyes , and see , all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked , speckled , and grisled : for i have seen all that laban doeth unto thee .
rachel and leah answered and said unto him , is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house ?
for all the riches which god hath taken from our father , that is ours , and our children's : now then , whatsoever god hath said unto thee , do .
he carried away all his cattle , and all his goods which he had gotten , the cattle of his getting , which he had gotten in padan-aram , for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan .
jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian , in that he told him not that he fled .
it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled . 
god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night , and said unto him , take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad . 
laban said to jacob , what hast thou done , that thou hast stolen away unawares to me , and carried away my daughters , as captives taken with the sword ?
hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters ? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing .
now , though thou wouldest needs be gone , because thou sore longedst after thy father's house , yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods ?
with whomsoever thou findest thy gods , let him not live : before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me , and take it to thee . for jacob knew not that rachel had stolen them .
now rachel had taken the images , and put them in the camel's furniture , and sat upon them . and laban searched all the tent , but found them not .
jacob was wroth , and chode with laban : and jacob answered and said to laban , what is my trespass ? what is my sin , that thou hast so hotly pursued after me ?
this twenty years have i been with thee ; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young , and the rams of thy flock have i not eaten .
thus i was ; in the day the drought consumed me , and the frost by night ; and my sleep departed from mine eyes .
except the god of my father , the god of abraham , and the fear of isaac , had been with me , surely thou hadst sent me away now empty . god hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands , and rebuked thee yesternight .
now therefore come thou , let us make a covenant , i and thou ; and let it be for a witness between me and thee .
jacob said unto his brethren , gather stones ; and they took stones , and made an heap : and they did eat there upon the heap .
laban said , this heap is a witness between me and thee this day . therefore was the name of it called galeed ; 
if thou shalt afflict my daughters , or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters , no man is with us ; see , god is witness betwixt me and thee .
this heap be witness , and this pillar be witness , that i will not pass over this heap to thee , and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me , for harm .
then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount , and called his brethren to eat bread : and they did eat bread , and tarried all night in the mount .
jacob went on his way , and the angels of god met him .
jacob sent messengers before him to esau his brother unto the land of seir , the country of edom .
i have oxen , and asses , flocks , and menservants , and womenservants : and i have sent to tell my lord , that i may find grace in thy sight .
then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed : and he divided the people that was with him , and the flocks , and herds , and the camels , into two bands ;
jacob said , o god of my father abraham , and god of my father isaac , the lord which saidst unto me , return unto thy country , and to thy kindred , and i will deal well with thee :
deliver me , i pray thee , from the hand of my brother , from the hand of esau : for i fear him , lest he will come and smite me , and the mother with the children .
he lodged there that same night ; and took of that which came to his hand a present for esau his brother ;
thirty milch camels with their colts , forty kine , and ten bulls , twenty she asses , and ten foals . 
he commanded the foremost , saying , when esau my brother meeteth thee , and asketh thee , saying , whose art thou ? and whither goest thou ? and whose are these before thee ?
so commanded he the second , and the third , and all that followed the droves , saying , on this manner shall ye speak unto esau , when ye find him .
so went the present over before him : and himself lodged that night in the company .
he took them , and sent them over the brook , and sent over that he had .
when he saw that he prevailed not against him , he touched the hollow of his thigh ; and the hollow of jacob's thigh was out of joint , as he wrestled with him .
he said unto him , what is thy name ? and he said , jacob .
jacob asked him , and said , tell me , i pray thee , thy name . and he said , wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name ? and he blessed him there .
as he passed over penuel the sun rose upon him , and he halted upon his thigh .
jacob lifted up his eyes , and looked , and , behold , esau came , and with him four hundred men . and he divided the children unto leah , and unto rachel , and unto the two handmaids .
he passed over before them , and bowed himself to the ground seven times , until he came near to his brother .
he lifted up his eyes , and saw the women and the children ; and said , who are those with thee ? and he said , the children which god hath graciously given thy servant . 
leah also with her children came near , and bowed themselves : and after came joseph near and rachel , and they bowed themselves .
esau said , i have enough , my brother ; keep that thou hast unto thyself .
take , i pray thee , my blessing that is brought to thee ; because god hath dealt graciously with me , and because i have enough . and he urged him , and he took it .
he said unto him , my lord knoweth that the children are tender , and the flocks and herds with young are with me : and if men should overdrive them one day , all the flock will die .
esau said , let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me . and he said , what needeth it ? let me find grace in the sight of my lord .
jacob journeyed to succoth , and built him an house , and made booths for his cattle : therefore the name of the place is called succoth .
he bought a parcel of a field , where he had spread his tent , at the hand of the children of hamor , shechem's father , for an hundred pieces of money .
dinah the daughter of leah , which she bare unto jacob , went out to see the daughters of the land .
his soul clave unto dinah the daughter of jacob , and he loved the damsel , and spake kindly unto the damsel .
jacob heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter : now his sons were with his cattle in the field : and jacob held his peace until they were come .
the sons of jacob came out of the field when they heard it : and the men were grieved , and they were very wroth , because he had wrought folly in israel in lying with jacob's daughter ; which thing ought not to be done .
make ye marriages with us , and give your daughters unto us , and take our daughters unto you .
shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren , let me find grace in your eyes , and what ye shall say unto me i will give .
the sons of jacob answered shechem and hamor his father deceitfully , and said , because he had defiled dinah their sister :
but in this will we consent unto you : if ye will be as we be , that every male of you be circumcised ;
but if ye will not hearken unto us , to be circumcised ; then will we take our daughter , and we will be gone .
the young man deferred not to do the thing , because he had delight in jacob's daughter : and he was more honourable than all the house of his father .
these men are peaceable with us ; therefore let them dwell in the land , and trade therein ; for the land , behold , it is large enough for them ; let us take their daughters to us for wives , and let us give them our daughters .
shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours ? only let us consent unto them , and they will dwell with us . 
it came to pass on the third day , when they were sore , that two of the sons of jacob , simeon and levi , dinah's brethren , took each man his sword , and came upon the city boldly , and slew all the males .
the sons of jacob came upon the slain , and spoiled the city , because they had defiled their sister .
all their wealth , and all their little ones , and their wives took they captive , and spoiled even all that was in the house .
they said , should he deal with our sister as with an harlot ?
then jacob said unto his household , and to all that were with him , put away the strange gods that are among you , and be clean , and change your garments :
they gave unto jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand , and all their earrings which were in their ears ; and jacob hid them under the oak which was by shechem .
so jacob came to luz , which is in the land of canaan , that is , bethel , he and all the people that were with him .
but deborah rebekah's nurse died , and she was buried beneath bethel under an oak : and the name of it was called allon-bachuth .
god said unto him , thy name is jacob : thy name shall not be called any more jacob , but israel shall be thy name : and he called his name israel .
the land which i gave abraham and isaac , to thee i will give it , and to thy seed after thee will i give the land .
jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him , even a pillar of stone : and he poured a drink offering thereon , and he poured oil thereon . 
they journeyed from bethel ; and there was but a little way to come to ephrath : and rachel travailed , and she had hard labour .
it came to pass , as her soul was in departing , for she died , that she called his name ben-oni : but his father called him benjamin .
jacob set a pillar upon her grave : that is the pillar of rachel's grave unto this day .
it came to pass , when israel dwelt in that land , that reuben went and lay with bilhah his father's concubine : and israel heard it . now the sons of jacob were twelve :
the sons of rachel ; joseph , and benjamin :
the sons of zilpah , leah's handmaid ; gad , and asher : these are the sons of jacob , which were born to him in padan-aram .
the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years .
now these are the generations of esau , who is edom .
bashemath ishmael's daughter , sister of nebajoth .
aholibamah bare jeush , and jaalam , and korah : these are the sons of esau , which were born unto him in the land of canaan .
for their riches were more than that they might dwell together ; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle . 
these are the generations of esau the father of the edomites in mount seir :
the sons of eliphaz were teman , omar , zepho , and gatam , and kenaz .
these are the sons of reuel ; nahath , and zerah , shammah , and mizzah : these were the sons of bashemath esau's wife .
these were dukes of the sons of esau : the sons of eliphaz the firstborn son of esau ; duke teman , duke omar , duke zepho , duke kenaz ,
these are the sons of reuel esau's son ; duke nahath , duke zerah , duke shammah , duke mizzah : these are the dukes that came of reuel in the land of edom ; these are the sons of bashemath esau's wife .
these are the sons of esau , who is edom , and these are their dukes .
dishon , and ezer , and dishan : these are the dukes of the horites , the children of seir in the land of edom .
the children of shobal were these ; alvan , and manahath , and ebal , shepho , and onam .
the children of anah were these ; dishon , and aholibamah the daughter of anah .
the children of ezer are these ; bilhan , and zaavan , and akan .
these are the dukes that came of the horites ; duke lotan , duke shobal , duke zibeon , duke anah , 
these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom , before there reigned any king over the children of israel .
bela died , and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned in his stead .
husham died , and hadad the son of bedad , who smote midian in the field of moab , reigned in his stead : and the name of his city was avith .
samlah died , and saul of rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead .
baal-hanan the son of achbor died , and hadar reigned in his stead : and the name of his city was pau ; and his wife's name was mehetabel , the daughter of matred , the daughter of mezahab .
duke aholibamah , duke elah , duke pinon ,
duke magdiel , duke iram : these be the dukes of edom , according to their habitations in the land of their possession : he is esau the father of the edomites .
these are the generations of jacob . joseph , being seventeen years old , was feeding the flock with his brethren ; and the lad was with the sons of bilhah , and with the sons of zilpah , his father's wives : and joseph brought unto his father their evil report .
when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren , they hated him , and could not speak peaceably unto him .
he said unto them , hear , i pray you , this dream which i have dreamed :
his brethren said to him , shalt thou indeed reign over us ? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us ? and they hated him yet the more for his dreams , and for his words . 
he told it to his father , and to his brethren : and his father rebuked him , and said unto him , what is this dream that thou hast dreamed ? shall i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth ?
his brethren went to feed their father's flock in shechem .
he said to him , go , i pray thee , see whether it be well with thy brethren , and well with the flocks ; and bring me word again . so he sent him out of the vale of hebron , and he came to shechem .
he said , i seek my brethren : tell me , i pray thee , where they feed their flocks .
when they saw him afar off , even before he came near unto them , they conspired against him to slay him .
come now therefore , and let us slay him , and cast him into some pit , and we will say , some evil beast hath devoured him : and we shall see what will become of his dreams .
reuben said unto them , shed no blood , but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness , and lay no hand upon him ; that he might rid him out of their hands , to deliver him to his father again .
they took him , and cast him into a pit : and the pit was empty , there was no water in it .
judah said unto his brethren , what profit is it if we slay our brother , and conceal his blood ?
then there passed by midianites merchantmen ; and they drew and lifted up joseph out of the pit , and sold joseph to the ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver : and they brought joseph into egypt . 
he returned unto his brethren , and said , the child is not ; and i , whither shall i go ? 
they sent the coat of many colours , and they brought it to their father ; and said , this have we found : know now whether it be thy son's coat or no .
jacob rent his clothes , and put sackcloth upon his loins , and mourned for his son many days .
the midianites sold him into egypt unto potiphar , an officer of pharaoh's , and captain of the guard .
judah saw there a daughter of a certain canaanite , whose name was shuah ; and he took her , and went in unto her .
she conceived again , and bare a son ; and she called his name onan .
judah took a wife for er his firstborn , whose name was tamar .
judah said unto onan , go in unto thy brother's wife , and marry her , and raise up seed to thy brother .
the thing which he did displeased the lord : wherefore he slew him also .
in process of time the daughter of shuah judah's wife died ; and judah was comforted , and went up unto his sheepshearers to timnath , he and his friend hirah the adullamite .
she put her widow's garments off from her , and covered her with a vail , and wrapped herself , and sat in an open place , which is by the way to timnath ; for she saw that shelah was grown , and she was not given unto him to wife . 
he turned unto her by the way , and said , go to , i pray thee , let me come in unto thee ; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law .) and she said , what wilt thou give me , that thou mayest come in unto me ? 
he said , what pledge shall i give thee ? and she said , thy signet , and thy bracelets , and thy staff that is in thine hand . and he gave it her , and came in unto her , and she conceived by him .
judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the adullamite , to receive his pledge from the woman's hand : but he found her not .
he returned to judah , and said , i cannot find her ; and also the men of the place said , that there was no harlot in this place .
it came to pass about three months after , that it was told judah , saying , tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot ; and also , behold , she is with child by whoredom . and judah said , bring her forth , and let her be burnt .
judah acknowledged them , and said , she hath been more righteous than i ; because that i gave her not to shelah my son . and he knew her again no more .
it came to pass , when she travailed , that the one put out his hand : and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread , saying , this came out first ,
afterward came out his brother , that had the scarlet thread upon his hand : and his name was called zarah .
the lord was with joseph , and he was a prosperous man ; and he was in the house of his master the egyptian .
joseph found grace in his sight , and he served him : and he made him overseer over his house , and all that he had he put into his hand . 
he left all that he had in joseph's hand ; and he knew not ought he had , save the bread which he did eat . and joseph was a goodly person , and well favoured . 
but he refused , and said unto his master's wife , behold , my master wotteth not what is with me in the house , and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand ;
it came to pass , as she spake to joseph day by day , that he hearkened not unto her , to lie by her , or to be with her .
she caught him by his garment , saying , lie with me : and he left his garment in her hand , and fled , and got him out .
that she called unto the men of her house , and spake unto them , saying , see , he hath brought in an hebrew unto us to mock us ; he came in unto me to lie with me , and i cried with a loud voice :
she laid up his garment by her , until his lord came home .
it came to pass , as i lifted up my voice and cried , that he left his garment with me , and fled out .
joseph's master took him , and put him into the prison , a place where the king's prisoners were bound : and he was there in the prison .
the keeper of the prison committed to joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison ; and whatsoever they did there , he was the doer of it .
it came to pass after these things , that the butler of the king of egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of egypt .
he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard , into the prison , the place where joseph was bound . 
they dreamed a dream both of them , each man his dream in one night , each man according to the interpretation of his dream , the butler and the baker of the king of egypt , which were bound in the prison . 
he asked pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house , saying , wherefore look ye so sadly to day ?
the chief butler told his dream to joseph , and said to him , in my dream , behold , a vine was before me ;
pharaoh's cup was in my hand : and i took the grapes , and pressed them into pharaoh's cup , and i gave the cup into pharaoh's hand .
yet within three days shall pharaoh lift up thine head , and restore thee unto thy place : and thou shalt deliver pharaoh's cup into his hand , after the former manner when thou wast his butler .
for indeed i was stolen away out of the land of the hebrews : and here also have i done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon .
in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for pharaoh ; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head .
yet within three days shall pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee , and shall hang thee on a tree ; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee .
he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again ; and he gave the cup into pharaoh's hand :
yet did not the chief butler remember joseph , but forgat him .
, behold , there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed ; and they fed in a meadow . 
the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine . so pharaoh awoke . 
, behold , seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them .
it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled ; and he sent and called for all the magicians of egypt , and all the wise men thereof : and pharaoh told them his dream ; but there was none that could interpret them unto pharaoh .
pharaoh was wroth with his servants , and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house , both me and the chief baker :
there was there with us a young man , an hebrew , servant to the captain of the guard ; and we told him , and he interpreted to us our dreams ; to each man according to his dream he did interpret .
then pharaoh sent and called joseph , and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon : and he shaved himself , and changed his raiment , and came in unto pharaoh .
joseph answered pharaoh , saying , it is not in me : god shall give pharaoh an answer of peace .
, behold , there came up out of the river seven kine , fatfleshed and well favoured ; and they fed in a meadow :
the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine :
i saw in my dream , and , behold , seven ears came up in one stalk , full and good :
the thin ears devoured the seven good ears : and i told this unto the magicians ; but there was none that could declare it to me .
the seven good kine are seven years ; and the seven good ears are seven years : the dream is one .
this is the thing which i have spoken unto pharaoh : what god is about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh . 
there shall arise after them seven years of famine ; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of egypt ; and the famine shall consume the land ;
for that the dream was doubled unto pharaoh twice ; it is because the thing is established by god , and god will shortly bring it to pass .
let pharaoh do this , and let him appoint officers over the land , and take up the fifth part of the land of egypt in the seven plenteous years .
that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine , which shall be in the land of egypt ; that the land perish not through the famine .
pharaoh said unto his servants , can we find such a one as this is , a man in whom the spirit of god is ?
thou shalt be over my house , and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled : only in the throne will i be greater than thou .
pharaoh took off his ring from his hand , and put it upon joseph's hand , and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen , and put a gold chain about his neck ; 
pharaoh said unto joseph , i am pharaoh , and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of egypt . 
joseph was thirty years old when he stood before pharaoh king of egypt . and joseph went out from the presence of pharaoh , and went throughout all the land of egypt .
he gathered up all the food of the seven years , which were in the land of egypt , and laid up the food in the cities : the food of the field , which was round about every city , laid he up in the same .
unto joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came , which asenath the daughter of poti-pherah priest of on bare unto him .
the name of the second called he ephraim : for god hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction .
the seven years of dearth began to come , according as joseph had said : and the dearth was in all lands ; but in all the land of egypt there was bread .
the famine was over all the face of the earth : and joseph opened all the storehouses , and sold unto the egyptians ; and the famine waxed sore in the land of egypt .
now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt , jacob said unto his sons , why do ye look one upon another ?
joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt .
the sons of israel came to buy corn among those that came : for the famine was in the land of canaan .
joseph saw his brethren , and he knew them , but made himself strange unto them , and spake roughly unto them ; and he said unto them , whence come ye ? and they said , from the land of canaan to buy food . 
joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them , and said unto them , ye are spies ; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come . 
we are all one man's sons ; we are true men , thy servants are no spies .
they said , thy servants are twelve brethren , the sons of one man in the land of canaan ; and , behold , the youngest is this day with our father , and one is not .
hereby ye shall be proved : by the life of pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence , except your youngest brother come hither .
he put them all together into ward three days .
if ye be true men , let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison : go ye , carry corn for the famine of your houses :
they said one to another , we are verily guilty concerning our brother , in that we saw the anguish of his soul , when he besought us , and we would not hear ; therefore is this distress come upon us .
they knew not that joseph understood them ; for he spake unto them by an interpreter .
then joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn , and to restore every man's money into his sack , and to give them provision for the way : and thus did he unto them .
as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn , he espied his money ; for , behold , it was in his sack's mouth .
they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan , and told him all that befell unto them ; saying ,
we said unto him , we are true men ; we are no spies :
the man , the lord of the country , said unto us , hereby shall i know that ye are true men ; leave one of your brethren here with me , and take food for the famine of your households , and be gone : 
it came to pass as they emptied their sacks , that , behold , every man's bundle of money was in his sack : and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money , they were afraid .
reuben spake unto his father , saying , slay my two sons , if i bring him not to thee : deliver him into my hand , and i will bring him to thee again .
the famine was sore in the land .
judah spake unto him , saying , the man did solemnly protest unto us , saying , ye shall not see my face , except your brother be with you .
but if thou wilt not send him , we will not go down : for the man said unto us , ye shall not see my face , except your brother be with you .
they said , the man asked us straitly of our state , and of our kindred , saying , is your father yet alive ? have ye another brother ? and we told him according to the tenor of these words : could we certainly know that he would say , bring your brother down ?
i will be surety for him ; of my hand shalt thou require him : if i bring him not unto thee , and set him before thee , then let me bear the blame for ever :
their father israel said unto them , if it must be so now , do this ; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels , and carry down the man a present , a little balm , and a little honey , spices , and myrrh , nuts , and almonds :
take also your brother , and arise , go again unto the man :
the men took that present , and they took double money in their hand , and benjamin ; and rose up , and went down to egypt , and stood before joseph .
the man did as joseph bade ; and the man brought the men into joseph's house . 
they came near to the steward of joseph's house , and they communed with him at the door of the house ,
it came to pass , when we came to the inn , that we opened our sacks , and , behold , every man's money was in the mouth of his sack , our money in full weight : and we have brought it again in our hand .
he said , peace be to you , fear not : your god , and the god of your father , hath given you treasure in your sacks : i had your money . and he brought simeon out unto them .
they made ready the present against joseph came at noon : for they heard that they should eat bread there .
he asked them of their welfare , and said , is your father well , the old man of whom ye spake ? is he yet alive ?
he lifted up his eyes , and saw his brother benjamin , his mother's son , and said , is this your younger brother , of whom ye spake unto me ? and he said , god be gracious unto thee , my son .
he washed his face , and went out , and refrained himself , and said , set on bread . 
they sat before him , the firstborn according to his birthright , and the youngest according to his youth : and the men marvelled one at another . 
he commanded the steward of his house , saying , fill the men's sacks with food , as much as they can carry , and put every man's money in his sack's mouth .
as soon as the morning was light , the men were sent away , they and their asses .
is not this it in which my lord drinketh , and whereby indeed he divineth ? ye have done evil in so doing .
they said unto him , wherefore saith my lord these words ? god forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing :
with whomsoever of thy servants it be found , both let him die , and we also will be my lord's bondmen .
then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground , and opened every man his sack .
then they rent their clothes , and laded every man his ass , and returned to the city .
joseph said unto them , what deed is this that ye have done ? wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine ?
he said , god forbid that i should do so : but the man in whose hand the cup is found , he shall be my servant ; and as for you , get you up in peace unto your father .
my lord asked his servants , saying , have ye a father , or a brother ? 
thou saidst unto thy servants , bring him down unto me , that i may set mine eyes upon him . 
thou saidst unto thy servants , except your youngest brother come down with you , ye shall see my face no more .
our father said , go again , and buy us a little food .
thy servant my father said unto us , ye know that my wife bare me two sons :
if ye take this also from me , and mischief befall him , ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave .
it shall come to pass , when he seeth that the lad is not with us , that he will die : and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave .
now therefore , i pray thee , let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord ; and let the lad go up with his brethren .
then joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him ; and he cried , cause every man to go out from me . and there stood no man with him , while joseph made himself known unto his brethren .
joseph said unto his brethren , i am joseph ; doth my father yet live ? and his brethren could not answer him ; for they were troubled at his presence .
now therefore be not grieved , nor angry with yourselves , that ye sold me hither : for god did send me before you to preserve life .
god sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth , and to save your lives by a great deliverance . 
haste ye , and go up to my father , and say unto him , thus saith thy son joseph , god hath made me lord of all egypt : come down unto me , tarry not : 
there will i nourish thee ; for yet there are five years of famine ; lest thou , and thy household , and all that thou hast , come to poverty .
ye shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt , and of all that ye have seen ; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither .
moreover he kissed all his brethren , and wept upon them : and after that his brethren talked with him .
pharaoh said unto joseph , say unto thy brethren , this do ye ; lade your beasts , and go , get you unto the land of canaan ;
now thou art commanded , this do ye ; take you wagons out of the land of egypt for your little ones , and for your wives , and bring your father , and come .
the children of israel did so : and joseph gave them wagons , according to the commandment of pharaoh , and gave them provision for the way .
to his father he sent after this manner ; ten asses laden with the good things of egypt , and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way .
they went up out of egypt , and came into the land of canaan unto jacob their father ,
they told him all the words of joseph , which he had said unto them : and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry him , the spirit of jacob their father revived :
israel took his journey with all that he had , and came to beer-sheba , and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac . 
he said , i am god , the god of thy father : fear not to go down into egypt ; for i will there make of thee a great nation : 
jacob rose up from beer-sheba : and the sons of israel carried jacob their father , and their little ones , and their wives , in the wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him .
his sons , and his sons' sons with him , his daughters , and his sons' daughters , and all his seed brought he with him into egypt .
the sons of reuben ; hanoch , and phallu , and hezron , and carmi .
the sons of levi ; gershon , kohath , and merari .
the sons of issachar ; tola , and phuvah , and job , and shimron .
these be the sons of leah , which she bare unto jacob in padan-aram , with his daughter dinah : all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three .
the sons of asher ; jimnah , and ishuah , and isui , and beriah , and serah their sister : and the sons of beriah ; heber , and malchiel .
the sons of rachel jacob's wife ; joseph , and benjamin .
the sons of benjamin were belah , and becher , and ashbel , gera , and naaman , ehi , and rosh , muppim , and huppim , and ard .
the sons of dan ; hushim . 
these are the sons of bilhah , which laban gave unto rachel his daughter , and she bare these unto jacob : all the souls were seven .
the sons of joseph , which were born him in egypt , were two souls : all the souls of the house of jacob , which came into egypt , were threescore and ten .
joseph made ready his chariot , and went up to meet israel his father , to goshen , and presented himself unto him ; and he fell on his neck , and wept on his neck a good while .
joseph said unto his brethren , and unto his father's house , i will go up , and shew pharaoh , and say unto him , my brethren , and my father's house , which were in the land of canaan , are come unto me ;
it shall come to pass , when pharaoh shall call you , and shall say , what is your occupation ?
then joseph came and told pharaoh , and said , my father and my brethren , and their flocks , and their herds , and all that they have , are come out of the land of canaan ; and , behold , they are in the land of goshen .
pharaoh said unto his brethren , what is your occupation ? and they said unto pharaoh , thy servants are shepherds , both we , and also our fathers .
pharaoh spake unto joseph , saying , thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee :
joseph brought in jacob his father , and set him before pharaoh : and jacob blessed pharaoh .
jacob said unto pharaoh , the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years : few and evil have the days of the years of my life been , and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage .
joseph placed his father and his brethren , and gave them a possession in the land of egypt , in the best of the land , in the land of rameses , as pharaoh had commanded . 
there was no bread in all the land ; for the famine was very sore , so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan fainted by reason of the famine .
when money failed in the land of egypt , and in the land of canaan , all the egyptians came unto joseph , and said , give us bread : for why should we die in thy presence ? for the money faileth .
they brought their cattle unto joseph : and joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses , and for the flocks , and for the cattle of the herds , and for the asses : and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year .
wherefore shall we die before thine eyes , both we and our land ? buy us and our land for bread , and we and our land will be servants unto pharaoh : and give us seed , that we may live , and not die , that the land be not desolate .
as for the people , he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of egypt even to the other end thereof .
then joseph said unto the people , behold , i have bought you this day and your land for pharaoh : lo , here is seed for you , and ye shall sow the land .
they said , thou hast saved our lives : let us find grace in the sight of my lord , and we will be pharaoh's servants .
israel dwelt in the land of egypt , in the country of goshen ; and they had possessions therein , and grew , and multiplied exceedingly .
the time drew nigh that israel must die : and he called his son joseph , and said unto him , if now i have found grace in thy sight , put , i pray thee , thy hand under my thigh , and deal kindly and truly with me ; bury me not , i pray thee , in egypt :
he said , swear unto me . and he sware unto him . and israel bowed himself upon the bed's head . 
one told jacob , and said , behold , thy son joseph cometh unto thee : and israel strengthened himself , and sat upon the bed . 
said unto me , behold , i will make thee fruitful , and multiply thee , and i will make of thee a multitude of people ; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession .
thy issue , which thou begettest after them , shall be thine , and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance .
israel beheld joseph's sons , and said , who are these ?
now the eyes of israel were dim for age , so that he could not see . and he brought them near unto him ; and he kissed them , and embraced them .
joseph brought them out from between his knees , and he bowed himself with his face to the earth .
israel stretched out his right hand , and laid it upon ephraim's head , who was the younger , and his left hand upon manasseh's head , guiding his hands wittingly ; for manasseh was the firstborn .
the angel which redeemed me from all evil , bless the lads ; and let my name be named on them , and the name of my fathers abraham and isaac ; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth .
joseph said unto his father , not so , my father : for this is the firstborn ; put thy right hand upon his head .
he blessed them that day , saying , in thee shall israel bless , saying , god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh : and he set ephraim before manasseh .
moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren , which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my bow . 
gather yourselves together , and hear , ye sons of jacob ; and hearken unto israel your father .
unstable as water , thou shalt not excel ; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed ; then defiledst thou it : he went up to my couch .
o my soul , come not thou into their secret ; unto their assembly , mine honour , be not thou united : for in their anger they slew a man , and in their selfwill they digged down a wall .
judah , thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise : thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies ; thy father's children shall bow down before thee . 
the sceptre shall not depart from judah , nor a lawgiver from between his feet , until shiloh come ; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be .
his eyes shall be red with wine , and his teeth white with milk .
issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens :
dan shall judge his people , as one of the tribes of israel .
i have waited for thy salvation , o lord .
out of asher his bread shall be fat , and he shall yield royal dainties .
joseph is a fruitful bough , even a fruitful bough by a well ; whose branches run over the wall :
but his bow abode in strength , and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty god of jacob ; (from thence is the shepherd , the stone of israel :)
the blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills : they shall be on the head of joseph , and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren .
all these are the twelve tribes of israel : and this is it that their father spake unto them , and blessed them ; every one according to his blessing he blessed them . 
in the cave that is in the field of machpelah , which is before mamre , in the land of canaan , which abraham bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a buryingplace . 
the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of heth .
joseph fell upon his father's face , and wept upon him , and kissed him .
forty days were fulfilled for him ; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed : and the egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days .
my father made me swear , saying , lo , i die : in my grave which i have digged for me in the land of canaan , there shalt thou bury me . now therefore let me go up , i pray thee , and bury my father , and i will come again .
joseph went up to bury his father : and with him went up all the servants of pharaoh , the elders of his house , and all the elders of the land of egypt ,
there went up with him both chariots and horsemen : and it was a very great company .
when the inhabitants of the land , the canaanites , saw the mourning in the floor of atad , they said , this is a grievous mourning to the egyptians : wherefore the name of it was called abel-mizraim , which is beyond jordan .
for his sons carried him into the land of canaan , and buried him in the cave of the field of machpelah , which abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of ephron the hittite , before mamre .
when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead , they said , joseph will peradventure hate us , and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him .
so shall ye say unto joseph , forgive , i pray thee now , the trespass of thy brethren , and their sin ; for they did unto thee evil : and now , we pray thee , forgive the trespass of the servants of the god of thy father . and joseph wept when they spake unto him . 
joseph said unto them , fear not : for am i in the place of god ? 
now therefore fear ye not : i will nourish you , and your little ones . and he comforted them , and spake kindly unto them .
joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation : the children also of machir the son manasseh were brought up upon joseph's knees .
joseph took an oath of the children of israel , saying , god will surely visit you , and ye shall carry up my bones from hence .